# Valuehash

A Clojure library that provides a way to provide higher-bit hashes of arbitrary
Clojure data structures, which respect Clojure's value semantics. That is, if
two objects are `clojure.core/=`, they will have the same hash value. To my
knowledge, no other Clojure data hashing libraries make this guarantee.

The protocol is extensible to arbitrary data types and can work with any hash
function.

Although the library uses byte streams as an intermediate format, it does not
tag types, or perform any optimization or compaction of the byte stream. Therefore it should _not_ be used as a serialization library. Use
[Fressian](https://github.com/clojure/data.fressian),
[Transit](https://github.com/cognitect/transit-clj) or something similar
instead.

## Usage

To get a MD5 hash of any Clojure object, do this:

```
(valuehash.api/md5 {:hello "world"})
=> #object["[B" 0x30cb9804 "[B@30cb9804"]
```

To get the hexadecimal string version, do this:

```
(valuehash.api/md5-str {:hello "world"})
=> "d3d7ccf8b8c217f3b52dc08929eabab8"
```

Also provided are `sha-1`, `sha-1-str`, `sha-256` and `sha-256-str`, which do
what they say on the tin.

### Custom hash functions

If you want a hash function other than md5, sha-1 or sha-256, you can obtain a
digest function for any algorithm supported by `java.security.MessageDigest` in
your JVM.

Obtain the digest function using the `messagedigest-fn` function, then pass it
and the object to be hashed to `digest`.

If you wish to obtain a hexadecimal string of the result, call the `hex-str` function on the result.

```clojure
(h/hex-str (h/digest (h/messagedigest-fn "MD2") {:hello "World"}))
=> "81c9637d9fcb071a486eeb0c76dce1f6"
```

### Even more custom hash functions

If nothing in `java.security.MessageDigest` meets your needs, you can supply
your own digest function to `valuehash.api/digest`. This may be any function
which takes a `java.io.InputStream` and returns a byte array.

For example, the following example defines and uses a valid but terrible hash function:

```clojure
(defn lazyhash [is]
  ;; chosen by a fair dice roll, guaranteed to be a random oracle
  (byte-array [(byte 4)]))

(h/digest lazyhash {:hello "world"})
```
## Semantics

This does not combine hashes: it converts the entire input data to binary data,
and hashes that. As such, it is suitable for cryptographic applications when
used with an appropriate hash function.

The binary data supplied to the hash function matches Clojure's equality
semantics. That is, objects that are semantically `clojure.core/=` will have the
same binary representation.

This means:

- All list types are encoded the same
- All set types are encoded the same
- All map types are encoded the same
- All integer numbers are encoded the same
- All floating-point numbers are encoded the same

The system does take some steps to rule out common types of "collisions", where two unequal objects have the same binary representation (and therefore the same hash). It injects "separator" bytes in collections, so that (for example) the binary representation of `["ab" "c"]` is not equal to `["a" "bc"]`.

## Supported Types

By default, Clojure's native types are supported: as a rule of thumb, if it can be printed to EDN by the default printer, it can be hashed with no fuss.

If you want to extend the system to hash arbitrary values, you can extend the `valuehash.impl/CanonicalByteArray` protocol to any object of your choosing.

## Performance

On my Macbook Pro, this library can determine the MD5 hash of small (0-10
element vectors) at a rate of about 22,000 hashed objects per second.

Larger, more complex nested object slow down significantly, to a rate of around
2,600 per second for objects generated by
`(clojure.test.check.generators/sample-seq gen/any-printable 100)`

To run your own benchmarks, check out the `valuehash.bench` namespace in the
`test` directory.

The current implementation is known to be somewhat naive, as it is single
threaded and performs lots of redundant array copying. If you have ideas for
how to make this faster, please see the `valuehash.impl` namespace and
re-implement/replace `CanonicalByteArray`, then submit a pull request with your
alternative impl in a separate namespace, with comparative benchmarks attached.

## License

Copyright © 2016 Luke VanderHart

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License either version 1.0 or (at
your option) any later version.
